SIP-47 - Clause Interleaving (#47)
scala/improvement-proposals: content/clause-interleaving.md

DefTypeParamClause     ::=  [nl] ‘[’ DefTypeParam {‘,’ DefTypeParam} ‘]’
DefTypeParam           ::=  {Annotation} id [HkTypeParamClause] TypeParamBounds
DefTermParamClause     ::=  [nl] ‘(’ [DefTermParams] ‘)’
UsingParamClause       ::=  [nl] ‘(’ ‘using’ (DefTermParams | FunArgTypes) ‘)’
DefImplicitClause      ::=  [nl] ‘(’ ‘implicit’ DefTermParams ‘)’
DefTermParams          ::=  DefTermParam {‘,’ DefTermParam}
DefTermParam           ::=  {Annotation} [‘inline’] Param
Param                  ::=  id ‘:’ ParamType [‘=’ Expr]
~~~

The main rules of interest are `DefParamClauses` and `DefParamClauseChunk`, which now allow any number of type parameter clauses, term parameter clauses and using parameter clauses, in any order as long as there are no two adjacent type clauses.

Note that these are also used for the right-hand side of extension methods, clause interleaving thus also applies to them.

It is worth pointing out that there can still only be at most one implicit parameter clause, which, if present, must be at the end.

The type system and semantics naturally generalize to these new method signatures.

### Restrictions

#### Type Currying

> Type parameters cannot be curried (having two type clauses next to each other), as this would allow partial type inference, there is a big concern it would become a recommended norm to _always_ curry type parameters.

Author: > I guess the worry is that over-usage of type currying would make the code unnecessarily cryptic and more difficult to read for humans.
```suggestion
Currying type clauses enables partial type inference, as the left clause can be specified while the right one is not.
As this is a very useful feature, we expect people would use it liberally, and recommending the curried form.
We are uncertain about the readability of the resulting methods, we have therefore decided to not include type currying as part of this proposal.
```

Author: @bjornregnell What do you think of the above ?

Reviewer: Looks very Good To Me!

* It is inefficient, as many closures must be created for each call to `getOrElse` (one per term clause to the right of the first non-initial type clause).
* Same problem as above with overloading

## Proposed solution
### High-level overview

To solve the above problems, we propose to generalize method signatures so that they can have multiple type parameter lists, interleaved with term parameter lists and using parameter lists.

For the heterogeneous key-value store example, this allows to define `getOrElse` as follows:
~~~ scala
def getOrElse(key: Key)[V >: key.Value](default: => V): V = …
~~~
It provides the best of all worlds:
* A convenient API at call site
* A single point of documentation
* Efficiency, since the method erases to a single JVM method with signature `getOrElse(Object,Object)Object`

### Specification
We amend the syntax of def parameter clauses as follows:

~~~
DefDcl                 ::=  DefSig ‘:’ Type
DefDef                 ::=  DefSig [‘:’ Type] ‘=’ Expr
DefSig                 ::=  id [DefParamClauses] [DefImplicitClause]
DefParamClauses        ::=  DefParamClauseChunk {DefParamClauseChunk}

> DefParamClauseChunk    ::=  [DefTypeParamClause] TermOrUsingParamClause {TermOrUsingParamClause}

Reviewer 2: does this mean that this is not valid anymore:
```
  def foo[A](implicit a: A) = ...
```

Author: Oh, nicely spotted, my intent was for it to be allowed,
but it appears I made a mistake with the grammar

Since the implementation team (which is also myself) can make changes to the proposal, I believe this can fall under this umbrella
I will think about what's the clearest way to fix the grammar

Author: This should fix it:
```diff
  DefDef                 ::=  DefSig [‘:’ Type] ‘=’ Expr
- DefSig                 ::=  id [DefParamClauses] [DefImplicitClause]
+ DefSig                 ::=  id [DefParamClauses] [DefTypeParamClause] [DefImplicitClause]
  DefParamClauses        ::=  DefParamClauseChunk {DefParamClauseChunk}
  DefParamClauseChunk    ::=  [DefTypeParamClause] TermOrUsingParamClause {TermOrUsingParamClause}
```
There is another quirk of this definition however, it allows to parse `def f(a: Int)(b: Int)` to be parsed in two different ways (one vs two `DefParamClauseChunk`), is this an issue ?

Reviewer 3: I didn’t have a look at the complete grammar but what you propose does not look correct, what about the following?

~~~ text
DefDef                 ::=  DefSig [‘:’ Type] ‘=’ Expr
DefSig                 ::=  id [DefParamClauses]
DefParamClauses        ::=  DefParamClauseChunk {DefParamClauseChunk}
DefParamClauseChunk    ::=  DefTypeParamClause | TermOrUsingParamClause
~~~

Reviewer 2: Alas, this allows two consecutive `type` clauses, or multiple `implicit` clauses.

here's another option:
```
DefSig                 ::=  id [DefParamClauses] [DefImplicitClause]
DefParamClauses        ::=  DefParamClauseChunkTypeOpt {DefParamClauseChunkTypeReq}
DefParamClauseChunkTypeOpt    ::=  [DefTypeParamClause] {TermOrUsingParamClause}
DefParamClauseChunkTypeReq    ::=  DefTypeParamClause {TermOrUsingParamClause}
```

Reviewer 2: ah, that doesn't work either... perhaps this:
```
DefSig                 ::=  id [DefParamClauses] [DefImplicitClause]
DefParamClauses        ::=  [DefTypeParamClause] {DefParamClauseChunk} [TermOrUsingParamClause]
DefParamClauseChunk    ::=  TermOrUsingParamClause {TermOrUsingParamClause} DefTypeParamClause
```

Author: > This should fix it:
> 
> ```diff
>   DefDef                 ::=  DefSig [‘:’ Type] ‘=’ Expr
> - DefSig                 ::=  id [DefParamClauses] [DefImplicitClause]
> + DefSig                 ::=  id [DefParamClauses] [DefTypeParamClause] [DefImplicitClause]
>   DefParamClauses        ::=  DefParamClauseChunk {DefParamClauseChunk}
>   DefParamClauseChunk    ::=  [DefTypeParamClause] TermOrUsingParamClause {TermOrUsingParamClause}
> ```
> 
> There is another quirk of this definition however, it allows to parse `def f(a: Int)(b: Int)` in two different ways (one vs two `DefParamClauseChunk`), is this an issue ?

> I didn’t have a look at the complete grammar but what you propose does not look correct

Could you expand on this, I can't manage to find a failing example with the above syntax

Author: I talked about it some more with @julienrf and we came to a very easy and clean solution:
Use the pre-"no type currying" syntax, and add an end of line comment that says "and type clauses cannot be adjacent"

Author: ```diff
- DefSig                 ::=  id [DefParamClauses] [DefImplicitClause]
+ DefSig                 ::=  id [DefParamClauses] [DefImplicitClause]    -- and type clauses cannot be adjacent
- DefParamClauses        ::=  DefParamClauseChunk {DefParamClauseChunk}
- DefParamClauseChunk    ::=  [DefTypeParamClause] TermOrUsingParamClause {TermOrUsingParamClause}
- TermOrUsingParamClause ::=  DefTermParamClause
-                          |  UsingParamClause
+ DefParamClauses        ::= DefParamClause { DefParamClause }
+ DefParamClause         ::= DefTypeParamClause
+                          | DefTermParamClause
+                          |  UsingParamClause
```
I think this syntax is easier to understand than the formal one

@julienrf How should I go about updating the proposal ?

Reviewer 3: Please open a PR in this repository with your changes.

TermOrUsingParamClause ::=  DefTermParamClause
                         |  UsingParamClause
DefTypeParamClause     ::=  [nl] ‘[’ DefTypeParam {‘,’ DefTypeParam} ‘]’
DefTypeParam           ::=  {Annotation} id [HkTypeParamClause] TypeParamBounds
DefTermParamClause     ::=  [nl] ‘(’ [DefTermParams] ‘)’
UsingParamClause       ::=  [nl] ‘(’ ‘using’ (DefTermParams | FunArgTypes) ‘)’

> DefImplicitClause      ::=  [nl] ‘(’ ‘implicit’ DefTermParams ‘)’

Reviewer 2: I'd also rename
```
TermOrUsingParamClause ::=  DefTermParamClause
                         |  UsingParamClause
UsingParamClause       ::=  [nl] ‘(’ ‘using’ (DefTermParams | FunArgTypes) ‘)’
DefImplicitClause      ::=  [nl] ‘(’ ‘implicit’ DefTermParams ‘)’
```
to
```
DefNonTypeParamClause  ::=  DefTermParamClause |  DefUsingParamClause
DefUsingParamClause    ::=  [nl] ‘(’ ‘using’ (DefTermParams | FunArgTypes) ‘)’
DefImplicitParamClause ::=  [nl] ‘(’ ‘implicit’ DefTermParams ‘)’
```

---
layout: sip

> title: SIP-47 Clause Interleaving

Reviewer 2: I'd like to mention once again that it should be "Parameter Clause Interleaving" as we're not doing that with if-clauses here.

Author: I appreciate your concern, however this has not caused confusion for anyone else, and there is precedent for omitting "parameter" from the name:
https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/reference/contextual/using-clauses.html
I will therefore not change the name for now, but I encourage affected others to comment on this potential problem

Reviewer 2: > I appreciate your concern, however this has not caused confusion for anyone else, and there is precedent for omitting "parameter" from the name: https://docs.scala-lang.org/scala3/reference/contextual/using-clauses.html I will therefore not change the name for now, but I encourage affected others to comment on this potential problem

it's not about omitting the word "parameter", it's about naming the type of clause. the word "using" names the clause in your other example.

stage: implementation

> status: waiting-for-implementation

Reviewer 4: Shouldn't we change that AFTER the vote? 😅

Reviewer 5: /cc @julienrf, WDYT?

Reviewer 3: It makes sense to change before the vote: the Committee votes for moving the proposal to the “implementation” stage.

UsingParamClause       ::=  [nl] ‘(’ ‘using’ (DefTermParams | FunArgTypes) ‘)’
DefImplicitClause      ::=  [nl] ‘(’ ‘implicit’ DefTermParams ‘)’
DefTermParams          ::=  DefTermParam {‘,’ DefTermParam}
DefTermParam           ::=  {Annotation} [‘inline’] Param
Param                  ::=  id ‘:’ ParamType [‘=’ Expr]
~~~

The main rules of interest are `DefParamClauses` and `DefParamClauseChunk`, which now allow any number of type parameter clauses, term parameter clauses and using parameter clauses, in any order as long as there are no two adjacent type clauses.

Note that these are also used for the right-hand side of extension methods, clause interleaving thus also applies to them.

It is worth pointing out that there can still only be at most one implicit parameter clause, which, if present, must be at the end.

The type system and semantics naturally generalize to these new method signatures.

### Restrictions

#### Type Currying
Type parameters cannot be curried (having two type clauses next to each other), as this would allow partial type inference, there is a big concern it would become a recommended norm to _always_ curry type parameters.

> Note however that, if absolutely necessary, it is still possible to curry type parameters as such: `def foo[A](using A =:= A)[B]`, since the implicit search for `A =:= A` should always succeed.

Reviewer 6: You can just use `DummyImplicit` instead of `A =:= A`.

Author: I didn't know about that, thank you !
```suggestion
Note however that, if absolutely necessary, it is still possible to curry type parameters as such: `def foo[A](using DummyImplicit)[B]`, since the implicit search for `DummyImplicit` will always succeed.
```

Reviewer: I guess the worry is that over-usage of type currying would make the code unnecessarily cryptic and more difficult to read for humans. If I'm right about that then perhaps include something similar in the text - "always" is a bold word and the universe will outlive the Scala programming language, presumably :)

Reviewer 7: Considering the odd constructs that have come out of `fewerBraces`, this seems like a weird hill to die on. `def foo[A][B](...)` is way less cryptic than `def foo[A]: FooPartiallyApplied[A] ...`

Reviewer: Well, I guess the point is that it is viewed as less cryptic than `def foo[A, B](...)`
(Anyways, I was just trying to help sharpening the text and describe in more detail the voiced concerns.)

Author: @morgen-peschke I appreciate your point of view
While type currying is not included in this SIP, this doesn't mean it will be banned from ever becoming a part of the language!

There are three mechanisms for partial type inference that I could come up with so far:
* type currying
* named type parameters
* allowing `?` in type application: `Vec.fill[4, ?]("Hello")` (`?` would get replaced by `String`)

I believe all of them should be carefully considered, to try to find the best way forward
(In particular, the best way forward might be to allow more than one)

To this end, a new SIP for type currying will need to be written, would you be interested in being the one to do it ?
(Of course you can take as much as you like from this SIP, in particular before commit [a492268](https://github.com/scala/improvement-proposals/pull/47/commits/a4922683dd61904aa2b0ac06fc8b8ff2ab766c20))

If I do write it instead, you will of course be welcome to comment, to try and make the best argument possible for type currying

Author: > I guess the worry is that over-usage of type currying would make the code unnecessarily cryptic and more difficult to read for humans. If I'm right about that then perhaps include something similar in the text - "always" is a bold word and the universe will outlive the Scala programming language, presumably :)

Thank you, I will incorporate changes to make it more clear and nuanced

> the universe will outlive the Scala programming language

That's true ^^
However, the "always" in the text is implicitly constrained by the usage of Scala (as type currying can only happen at definition), so those two statements can coexist without contradiction !

Reviewer: > those two statements can coexist without contradiction

Lol. Yes different types of currying can co-exist in this ambiguous real world. (I had some extra garam masala in my spicy stew yesterday, for a change and I gave my cooking :100:  )

Reviewer 7: @Sporarum 
> To this end, a new SIP for type currying will need to be written, would you be interested in being the one to do it ?

I'd be interested, but due to offline stuff, I wouldn't be able to pick it up until around December.

Author: @morgen-peschke 
Okay, if it needs to be done before, I'll do it instead, otherwise feel free to contact me when you have the time
